# Stack and Heap memory
- primitive types and references are stored in stack
- Objects are stored in heap
## `stack` memory
  - create for each method call
  - store primitive local variables and references to objects( in the heap.). Each ref consume 8 bytes in 64bit system. 
  - Each JVM execution thread has its own stack memory. Size can be specified using `JVM parameter -Xss`
  - `java.lang.StackOverflowError` (eg: recursion without termination)

## `heap` memory
  - allocate memory for developor defined objects and JDK classes 
  - includes any object that created with `new` keyword
  - Objects created inside the heap memory can be accessed by all threads of the application.
  - heap depends in the available physical memory, `java.lang.OutOfMemoryError` (eg, loading huge dataset)

# Parameter Passing mechanism
### primitive types
- primitive types are passed by value: 
  - `copies of primitive values` (e.g., values of int and double)
  - When a method modifies a `primitive-type` parameter, changes to the parameter have `no effect on the original argument value` in the calling method.
```java
public class SwappingPrimitivesDemo {
  public static void main(String... args) {
    int k = 42;int q = 44;
    swap(k, q);  // swap only happen inside method swap()
    System.out.println("k = " + k);  // k be still 42
    System.out.println("q = " + q);  // q be still 44
  }
  static void swap(int a, int b) {
    int temp = a;a = b;b = temp;
  }
}
```
### reference types
- The Java Spec says that `everything in Java is pass-by-value`(includes the reference itself). There is no such thing as "pass-by-reference" in Java.
  - passing `copies of references(aka address)`
- What they call "references" act/feel more like what we'd call "pointers" (address) in most other languages. 
  - References are basically (in this context) syntactic sugar that hide the pointer from user
```java
// essentially passing the address of the created Dog object to the foo method
Dog myDog = new Dog("Rover");
foo(myDog);
```
- a reference created inside a scope will impact not impact reference outside the scope
  - that is because the reference `someDog` is a copy to the reference `myDog`
```java
Dog myDog = new Dog("Rover");  // at adress 42

public void foo(Dog someDog) {
    someDog.setName("Max");    // dog at adress 42 modified 
    someDog = new Dog("Fifi");  // at adress 42
    someDog.setName("Rowlf");   
}
myDog   // still point at adress 42 
```

# Clone Object/Collection `TODO`


# Garbage Collection [reading](https://newrelic.com/blog/best-practices/java-garbage-collection#:~:text=Garbage%20collection%20in%20Java%20is,be%20executed%20by%20a%20JVM.)
## Overview
- Java provide automatic Garbage Collector
  - When objects are no longer needed, the garbage collector finds and tracks these `unused objects` and deletes them to free up space
    - the collector `scans the heap`: looking for object with `0 reference`
    - the collector removes the object, freeing up memory

> The garbage collector uses a `mark-and-sweep algorithm` to mark all `unreachable objects` as garbage collection, then scans through live objects to `find objects that are still reachable`


- `memory leak` is still a potential
  - user code `continues to reference the object` even it's `no longer being used`
  - when it occurs, the problem is generally hard to detect
## GC principle
### Heap Partition 
Java partition heap into three parts:
   - `Eden`: newly created object, short live object
     - most frequently scaned
     - when full, there will be a scan:
       - unrefed object => remove
       - long TTL => move to the `Survivor`
   - `Survivor`:there are two level of `Survivor` space: zero and one
     - less checked compare to Eden
   - `Tenured`: where long-lived objects are stored
     - Objects are eventually moved to this space if they survive a certain number of garbage collection cycles
     - it is least checked space
### Mark-and-sweep
two phases in this algorithm: mark followed by sweep. 
   - When a Java object is created in the heap, it has a `mark bit` that is set to 0 (false)
   - During the `mark` phase, the garbage collector traverses object trees starting at their roots. When an object is reachable from the root, the mark bit is set to 1 (true). Meanwhile, the mark bits for unreachable objects is unchanged.
   - During the `sweep` phase, the garbage collector traverses the heap, reclaiming memory from all items with a mark bit of 0 (false).

### What triggers GC:
- The GC detail varies depends on the GC implementaion  
- three types of events:
  - **Minor events**: when new generation (Eden + Survivor0 + Survivor1 spaces) are full

  - **Major events**: These clear space in both the young and old generations, which takes longer time

## 4 types of GC
- Serial garbage collector
  - typically used for smaller, single-threaded environments. This is `bad` because garbage collector takes over the thread, freezing other processes.
- Parallel garbage collector
  - `JVM’s default` garbage collector.
  - uses multiple threads
  - still need to freeze application thread
- Concurrent mark-and-sweep collector (CMS)
  - uses multiple threads
  - it freezes application threads less frequently compare to parallel GC
  - only garbage collect the old generation concurrently, still needs to freeze exection when collecting young generation
- Garbage first (G1) 
  - don't use eden, survivor, and tenured spaces that other garbage collectors use, but other splitting method
  - collect both young and old generations together, 
  - concurrently, rarely freeze


## GC `Optimization`
- You can’t force garbage collection!
- Rules to follow to optimize GC: 
  - `Create objects inside a method`: After methods are executed, all objects called within those methods become unreachable, thus eligible for GC
  - `Nullify/reassign the reference variable.` manually set reference variable to null or different object, and make the object previously refered to unreachable. 
  - Create an `anonymous object`. An anonymous object doesn’t have a reference, so the garbage collector will mark and remove it during the next garbage collection cycle.
  - changing the `garbage collector` you use
  - using an application monitoring tool to optimize performance


## System.gc()
 > Explicitly calling System.gc() is known for being a bad practice.
 - System.gc(): trigger a major GC
>Calling the gc method suggests that the Java Virtual Machine expend effort toward recycling unused objects in order to make the memory they currently occupy available for quick reuse.

- System.gc() cause an expensive stop-the-world phase -- significant performance penalty.

- Garbage collectors nowadays are really smart. They have all knowledge about memory usage and other statistics to be able to make proper decisions. Hence, we should trust them.
  - We can prevent System.gc() from doing any work by using the -XX:DisableExplicitGC JVM flag.

## finalize() Method